221027

Aired October 27, 2022 - 04:00   ET
THIS IS A RUSH TRANSCRIPT. THIS COPY MAY NOT BE IN ITS FINAL FORM AND MAY BE UPDATED.
COY WIRE, CNN 10 ANCHOR:  Hey, everyone. Bad news it's only Thursday. Good news it's Friday eve and we're going to slay today. I'm Coy. This is CNN 10, and we have a powerful show for you today. And we start with the ongoing and devastating situation occurring in Nigeria in West Africa. A month ago, the country experienced its worst flooding in a decade. Hundreds were killed as homes and businesses were submerged. Weeks later, the death toll has risen and communities remain underwater, displacing more than one million people from their homes.  Victims of the flood blame the tragedy on the government's response or lack thereof. Government officials say they released flood warnings ahead of the disaster and advised residents to move to safer ground. There is a question as to whether those warnings even reach some communities and experts say proper relief has not reached many Nigerians. Food is scarce in the country and difficult for many to afford. Nigeria's economy is struggling. Inflation hit a 17-year high of over 20 percent in August. This has further strained people's spending power and capacity to relocate. People have lost everything and many survivors are living in terrible conditions in camps and shelters with little to no government assistance. CNN correspondent Larry Madowo has been reporting on this for us on the ground in Bayelsa, Nigeria, where he's seen firsthand the tragic events that people there are facing. (BEGIN VIDEOTAPE) LARRY MADOWO, CNN CORRESPONDENT (voice-over):  Our communities still submerged nearly a month after the flooding began with no end in sight. Boats have become the only way to get around much of Bayelsa State in Southern Nigeria. The streets have turned to rivers, driving entire communities away from their homes.  We have really suffered, she says. Tell the government to help us. UGERE OBI, FLOOD VICTIM:  Again, tell them to come help us. MADOWO:  Everything you own is here under the water and this is your house? OBI:  Yes. Everything. MADOWO:  Some are living rough on the streets, washing with this water, cooking with it and bathing in it. Even people's homes and businesses and livelihoods are already submerged, it's still raining and there is more expected. The Nigerian government is warning this could go until November, so even more of this. This is Nigeria's worst flooding in a decade.  Aniso Handy has remained in this house through it all. ANISO HANDY, FLOOD VICTIM:  Nigerians are used to manage. If not, we would have all died. We have not seen this situation where people are not cared for. But Nigerians care for themselves. We are just like infants that have no father, no mother. MADOWO:  The feeling of abandonment runs deep here. The victims are disappointed with the Nigerian government's response which hasn't declared the flood a national emergency. The floods have affected 33 of Nigeria's 36 states partly due to well above average rainfall.  Bayelsa is among those cut off from the nation with major highways underwater. The situation has been exacerbated by poor drainage infrastructure and an overflowing dam in neighboring Cameroon.  But with a warmer climate causing more intense rainfall, authorities have also blamed it on climate change, angering some Nigerians. In this community though, there are more short-term consequences. It's a tough life to navigate for humans and animals alike, but life must go on.  Larry Madowo, CNN, Bayelsa State, Nigeria. (END VIDEOTAPE) WIRE:  Next up today, a debate around driverless cars. Are they safe? Are they needed? Are they helpful?  Well, what do you think?  The technology continues to be tested in various cities around the U.S. and one company called Waymo just announced it's planning to launch robo taxis in one of America's most populated cities, Los Angeles. They've already been tested in Phoenix, Arizona, and San Francisco.  We're talking fully autonomous or self-controlled driverless rides relying on detailed maps and sensors to navigate their surroundings. Proponents say these electric vehicles would provide more eco-friendly modes of transportation, while opponents of safety concerns and say that technology is not quite ready to be taken mainstream. CNN transportation editor Michael Ballaban gives us a glimpse now at a recent experience he had with the full self-driving technology available in a Tesla. (BEGIN VIDEOTAPE) MICHAEL BALLABAN, CNN TRANSPORTATION EDITOR:  Oh, we've got a situation in front of us. Whoa, whoa, whoa. Oh, no, we're going on the wrong side of the road. Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa. Nope, nope, nope. It wanted to hit the truck.  This is a Tesla model 3. So we are turning on the full self-driving beta. Okay, the car is now officially technically sort of driving itself. Whoa, whoa, that was a really sharp turn the car just tried to make. Oh, we've got a situation in front of us. Whoa. Okay, what we just had in front of us was a UPS truck coming onto our lane. We had a guy in front of us with a cargo bike. To avoid hitting the guy on the bike, the car seemed to want to put us straight into a giant UPS truck. I would prefer not to hit a UPS truck today. So I took over. It does seem to need an interruption every couple of blocks or so. Sometimes if the car is hesitating a little bit I have to intervene. You also have to be ready to take over at any time. Now, this is challenging. Oh, no, we're going on the wrong side of the road. We're not trying to make this car screw up. We're not trying to have a laugh at Elon Musk's suspense. That's not the point. We're really just trying to see how it handles driving in the city.  So far, it's going okay. We're going down a pretty just straight normal road. There's not a lot of pedestrians here and when you're going down a straight road with not a lot of pedestrians, the car actually seems to be doing okay. We're doing right around the speed limit. You know, we're not hitting anything.  The car can see cones. The car can see trucks. The car can see even pedestrians on the other side of the street.  Seeing might not be totally the issue here, it's knowing what to do in challenging situations, stuff that experience teaches you. A lot of people have issues with this being called full self-driving. First and foremost, it's not fully self-driving, I have to sit here. If it was fully self-  driving as promised that would let you take a nap, while you're driving along.  You know, it does seem to be making all the drivers upset. It's the people behind us it's the people honking. Now I'm not saying of truly fully autonomous car will never happen but I think at this point we're still years away. SUBTITLE:  Tesla did not respond to CNN Business' request for comment. (END VIDEOTAPE) (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) WIRE:  I like to think of myself as a fun guy, but I've got nothing on these guys. Did you know that mushrooms are the largest life forms on the planet? Yep, they expand and grow underground with interconnected fibers called mycelium, looking for food, often nutrients from soil and trees, alive or dead. In fact, the largest living organism on Earth right now is a single honey mushroom in the Malheur National Forest in Oregon. It's three and a half miles wide about 2,500 acres, and it's believed to be about 2,400 years old. Now, that's a humongous fungus and that's random. (END VIDEO CLIP) WIRE:  All right. Halloween is exactly two peace signs days away, and I am loving your costume suggestions that you've been sending me on Instagram, Snapchat and TikTok. Lex Luthor, Mr. Clean, keep them coming. I'm @CoyWire there. And speaking of TikTok, 73-year-old sensation Barbara "Babs" Costello has given folks pumpkin to talk about. Carving tips like sprinkling cinnamon in there to treat your olfactory senses. Oh my gord. (BEGIN VIDEOTAPE) BARBARA COSTELLO, TIKTOK SENSATION:  I'm going to remove all those nasty strings the easier way. SUBTITLE:  This 73-year-old TikTok sensation gave us some hacks on how to improve the spooky season.  In a new video, Barbara "Babs" Costello broke down the do's and don'ts of pumpkin carving.  COSTELLO:  Hi, everybody. It's Babs. Did your mom ever tell you the do's and don'ts of pumpkin carving? SUBTITLE:  1. Carve the pumpkin from your lap. COSTELLO:  Don't stand and carve your pumpkin. Sit. Just put them on your lap. SUBTITLE:  2. Carve from the bottom of your pumpkin. COSTELLO:  Now time to cut the bottom of your pumpkin, not the top.  SUBTITLE:  3. Use a hand mixer to clean out your pumpkin. COSTELLO:  Don't do this. Use your hand mixer instead. Get all those strings cleaned up. Your mixer did the hard work of loosening all those strings. SUBTITLE:  4. Use a red dry erase marker to design the face. COSTELLO:  When designing your pumpkin face, use a dry erasable red marker that you can get rid of the lines after you carve.  SUBTITLE:  5. Carve the design with a rubber mallet and a cookie cutter. COSTELLO:  If you don't want to struggle using a knife to carve your pumpkin, just use a soft-headed mallet and your cookie cutter, and just push it right through. Remove all your red lines. SUBTITLE:  6. Cover all surfaces with Vaseline to keep it fresh. COSTELLO:  Don't let all your work go to waste. Those kids want to enjoy these pumpkins. Take Vaseline and rub it on all the open cut surfaces. We'll keep your pumpkin moist won't dry out as quickly, and it should last about one to two weeks.  SUBTITLE:  7. And finally, sprinkle some cinnamon. COSTELLO:  And if you want a beautifully scented jack-o-lantern, try sprinkling some cinnamon right on the top and over the candle she goes and she smells delicious. Happy Halloween. (END VIDEOTAPE) WIRE:  All right. You gorgeous creatures, today is National Civics Day, celebrating the importance of civic education as a foundation for a strong democracy.  And we want to give a strong shout out now, Walnut Cove, North Carolina, Southeastern Stokes Middle School. Rise up and have an awesome day.  It's almost Friday. See you tomorrow. I'm Coy and this is CNN 10. END221103

Aired November 03, 2022 - 04:00   ET
THIS IS A RUSH TRANSCRIPT. THIS COPY MAY NOT BE IN ITS FINAL FORM AND MAY BE UPDATED.
COY WIRE, CNN 10 ANCHOR:  Hey, everyone. It's your boy Coy, and it's Thursday. So, happy Friday eve to you. This is CNN 10. We have an awesome show for you today, so without further ado, let's do what we do. We start today with the latest news out of China. Foxconn, one of Apple's largest suppliers, is racing to control a COVID-19 outbreak at its campus in the central Chinese city of Zhengzhou. Trending social media videos show anxious workers reportedly fleeing the lockdown facility earlier this week after experiencing food shortages and difficult living conditions, including mandatory isolation. The city, which has a population of more than 12 million people, identified dozens of COVID-19 cases last month and the Chinese government shows few signs of easing its COVID policies. These events highlight how China's strict zero COVID policy is hurting international business. We'll hear now from my colleague Selina Wang, the CNN international correspondent, reporting on the chaotic conditions at the Foxconn factory. (BEGIN VIDEOTAPE) SELINA WANG, CNN CORRESPONDENT:  Chaos at Foxconn, one of Apple's largest suppliers. It's Zhengzhou factory, which is its largest iPhone assembly factory in central China, is trying to contain a COVID flare-up but workers are fleeing the COVID restrictions. Viral videos on social media show masses of workers carrying their luggage trekking long distances across highways. Workers in recent days have been flooding social media with complaints about subpar living conditions, the poor quality of food and the difficulty and getting enough food amid the intense COVID restrictions. The exodus is putting major strain on Foxconn at a critical period just before the holiday season. It's another reminder of how China's zero COVID policy is hurting international businesses. According to analyst estimates, the Zhengzhou factory accounts for as much as 85 percent of Apple's iPhone assembly capacity. According to Counterpoint Research, they estimate that this could jeopardize 10 to 30 percent of the iPhone-14 production if this situation doesn't stabilize in the near term. Now, according to state media, Foxconn is trying to boost capacity production at other sites. The company says it is actually quadrupling bonuses for workers at the Zhengzhou plant in order to incentivize workers to stay. But zero COVID is clearly still having a massive impact on businesses, on people's daily lives, the entire city of Zhengzhou, which is home to more than 12 million people, it's been under lockdown since late October. These constant lockdowns in China are causing global businesses to re- evaluate the reliability of China as a production base. In fact, Apple has been increasing production in places like India in order to reduce its dependency on China. Selina Wang, CNN, Beijing. (END VIDEOTAPE) (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) WIRE:  Ten-second trivia: In Spanish, the word "manta" means what? Blanket, bread, balloon or basket. Manta refers to a type of cloak or blanket which is why manta rays share the name describing the look of the animal's large flat diamond-shaped bodies. (END VIDEO CLIP) WIRE:  Today is CNN's Call to Earth Day, which aims to highlight the conservation work of organizations and individuals around the world and in connection with that. We have a special feature with marine scientists and Rolex Awards laureate Kerstin Forsberg who's working to protect manta rays in her home country of Peru. I recently had a chance to talk with her about her experience beneath the waves. (BEGIN VIDEOTAPE) KERSTIN FORSBERG, MARINE BIOLOGIST AND CONSERVATIONIST:  The ocean is our source of life. The ocean touches us in every single second. It's, you know, connected with our atmosphere. The ocean provides resources. The ocean provides oxygen in our planet. The ocean provides so many different things to inspire us even on a cultural or emotional level. WIRE:  What made you fall in love with the ocean? Why did you choose this path? FORSBERG:  I was passionate about nature and environment and animals ever since I was a kid. I was always reading about animals, reading about nature. And then I think as I grew up and I decided to start a career in biology, it became really clear to me that the ocean was in real trouble, and that a lot of people needed to really start to think about the importance that the ocean has on our everyday lives. WIRE:  You have designed and developed dozens of environmental initiatives. What are some of the biggest challenges facing our oceans and ocean life right now? FORSBERG:  We're taking all the resources out of it. We're polluting the ocean. We're putting all our waste and dumping all their waste into it. So it's really about thinking of us as our everyday and how we connect to the ocean, and how we can depend on the ocean, but we can also shape the ocean. So, through sustainable seafood consumption, through making sure that we are utilizing our waste properly, and that's how we're going to ultimately stop those challenges which at the end are all about over-exposition, pollution and also climate change and habitat destruction. We started building a network of schools. It's called the Marine Educators Network of Northern Peru. And this network of schools started to grow, in over local schools in northern Peru, connecting between each other with teachers starting to incorporate ocean literacy within classrooms, but then building on that having youth start developing their own environmental projects that benefited their communities. First of all, we work with schools. We partner together with schools and with teachers and we develop an ocean literacy training program in which kids learn about the ocean, learn about how we're connected to the ocean. But even beyond that, they learn about environmental leadership and how to develop their own project. So we're giving them the tools on how to develop a project how to set out goals how to develop your own budget, how to track your progress and in doing that connect kids so we've developing feedback between each other and really developing this sense of global citizenship at the end, right? We all need to start connecting between our ourselves as global citizens in order to move forward and address sustainability challenges. WIRE:  Well, we have a special day, Call to Earth Day. I'm sure you have something up your sleeve or two. FORSBERG:  For Call to Earth Day, we will be hosting an activity in northern Peru, with over 40 different youth. These are local university students and we're partnering with a series of local organizations, including from the regional government and civil society and conservation areas. So, it's really about having everybody together. It's going to be a huge celebration, where different organizations come together, with different youth come together, and again, we're different disciplines, right? Come together, and ultimately, land and sea come together So, that's what it's all about for us, Call to Earth. It's a celebration of our planet that connects us all. WIRE:  Kerstin Forsberg, your -- your smile, your passion are contagious. You inspire us as we aspire to make this world a bit of a better place. Thank you so much for joining us. FORSBREG:  Thank you so much for the invitation. (END VIDEOTAPE) WIRE:  For today's 10 out of 10, we may have bitten off more than we can choo choo. The world's longest ever passenger train took a trip through the Swiss Alps. What ingenuity, this train is 1.2 miles long, made up of a hundred cars, it had to be a slowcomotive, taking about an hour to complete a 15-mile trip, through 22 tunnels, over 48 bridges. The record-breaking event took place on October 29th, the 175th anniversary of Switzerland's first railway. For your news, for some fun, we're here for you train or shine. And so is shout-out time. Mrs. Bush's class at Bosqueville Middle School in Waco, Texas. Think it, speak it, believe it. Did you know that today, November 3rd is National Stress Awareness Day. So, like my four-year-old daughter tells me, smell the flowers, cool the soup. Whenever you feel overwhelmed, don't fret about the future. Don't worry about the past. Just take a deep breath and embrace the power of now. I'm Coy and this is CNN 10. END221103
221104

Aired November 04, 2022 - 04:00:00   ET
THIS IS A RUSH TRANSCRIPT. THIS COPY MAY NOT BE IN ITS FINAL FORM AND MAY BE UPDATED.
COY WIRE, CNN 10 ANCHOR:  Hey you. You made it to Friday, and you already know Friday's rock. I'm Coy. This is CNN 10. And we've got an awesome show for you today. Let's finish this week strong. I have some good news to start your weekend. Many of you get an extra hour of sleep on Sunday, Daylight Saving Time. But could this be the last year of it? Every year on the first Sunday of November at 2:00 a.m., many of us turn our clocks back an hour. On the second Sunday in March, they spring back forward an hour. But where did this idea of shifting time come from and why is it so polarizing? Let's take 10 to break it all down. While Benjamin Franklin gets credit for the first mention of the idea, Daylight Saving Time was first implemented in the U.S. with the Standard Time Act of 1918. A wartime measure with the purpose of adding more daylight hours to conserve energy resources Currently, not all states participate in daylight saving, including most of Arizona and Hawaii. Over 70 countries around the world use daylight saving time with notable exceptions of China and Japan. But earlier this year, the U.S. Senate passed a bill called the Sunshine Protection Act which would make Daylight Saving Time permanent year round, beginning in the fall of 2023. That bill is currently sitting in the House of Representatives. If passed there and then signed by the president, it would mean no more changing clocks in the U.S. There are, of course, arguments for and against the practice. We'll travel to the United Kingdom now to meet a small group of clockmakers who have a big job of making sure everything is working on time, especially when it comes to the time change. (BEGIN VIDEOTAPE) ALEX JEFFREY, CLOCKMAKER, PALACE OF WESTMINSTER:  I love talking about clocks. I could talk about clocks all day. Not everyone wants to hear about them, but everyone wants to hear about the clocks at the Palace of Westminster. Whether it's Big Ben, whether it's just being interested in such a busy building, working on clocks, doing the time change, maintaining, it's something I take a lot of pride in. REPORTER:  Ian Westworth and Alex Jeffrey are part of a small team of clockmakers at the Palace of Westminster in London. Twice a year, when the clocks spring forward or fall back across the United Kingdom, they have the responsibility of adjusting 2,000 timepieces before lawmakers return to work. JEFFREY:  There's two thousand clocks on the parliamentary estate. There's 500 heritage clocks, there's two days and it's our task to perform the GMT time change. IAN WESTWORTH, CLOCMAKER, PALACE OF WESTMINISTER:  And overnight, we changed Big Ben. The great clock of Westminster and we put that back an hour just to make sure everybody who can now see the dials can actually tell at the right time when they wake up on Sunday morning. JEFFREY:  So, this is one of our heritage clocks. There's around four or five hundred of them, and they're just going to bring the minute hand back to do the time change being careful not to graze the dial, and it's -- in one of the committee rooms along committee corridor where a lot of important meetings happen. WESTWORTH:  We have clocks here that pre-date this palace and some that were designed specifically for this palace. We do actually come across clocks that we've never found before. It only happened the other week. An MP contacted us saying, I've got a clock in my office, it hasn't run for some time. And I'm thinking, I've been here 18 years and I've never been into your office. He said that's probably why it hasn't worked. JEFFREY:  The time changes were put in initially as a mechanism, a practical mechanism to take advantage of daylight hours in the summer. So, it's important I think to keep that tradition. REPORTER:  In the United Kingdom, Winston Churchill championed the concept of daylight saving during the First World War before he became prime minister, believing that the country could save energy by stretching the hours of evening sunlight. The practice has spread across the world. In the U.S. most states observe daylight saving moving clocks forward in the spring. Only Hawaii and most of Arizona don't. In 2022, the Senate passed the Sunshine Protection Act, a law which would make Daylight Saving Time permanent across the United States from November 5th, 2023. If passed by the House, the clocks would not fall back again. In the U.K., a 2019 poll showed that a small majority of Britons want to keep changing the clocks. At the Palace of Westminster, its resident clockmakers are responsible for maintaining this tradition. WESTWORTH:  Even with this digital world, you know, everybody's got a computer with a clock at the bottom or they've got a digital watch on. But the MPS and the lords or the staff, who've actually got a ticking clock in their office. One of the first things they look at is the ticking clock and not the one on the wrist. Our job is to make sure that every day, these clocks are working for them. The last clock of the day before doing great clock tonight. JEFFREY:  You know, there's a lot of ground to cover. I left my step count on last year and it was 55,000 steps. It's very time consuming but it's very rewarding. You know, we can say to each other, well done, guys. It's a job well done and when people turn up for work on Monday, they're right on time. (END VIDEOTAPE) WIRE:  And now it's time for some hero talk. We've been introducing you to CNN Heroes since the start of the school year. Together, we met a woman upcycling old computers to open new worlds for young people in our home country of Kenya. We met a teacher in New Jersey on a mission to hand out free books by the thousands. This week, CNN announced the top heroes of the year. Let's meet them and hear how they are making this world a better place. (BEGIN VIDEOTAPE) ANDERSON COOPER, CNN CORRESPONDENT:  From California when elderly dog owners can no longer care for their pets, Carie Broecker helps them stay together or finds these beloved family members new forever homes. From Nashville, Richard Casper uses art to heal the wounds of war. He's helping fellow veterans share their stories visually and vocally. Nelly Cheboi is bringing technology to young people in her native Kenya, recycling old computers, she provides the tools and education for brighter futures. North Carolina innovator Nora El-Khouri Spencer is training women for well- paying careers in construction while also helping seniors age safely at home. From south Philadelphia after spending five years in prison on drug charges, Tyrique Glasgow is now providing his neighborhood long challenged by poverty and gun violence with safety and opportunity. Alaskan nurse Teresa Gray leads volunteer medics into global hot spots, delivering vital care and support to those in need. Meymuna Hussein-Cattan is helping refugees and immigrants transition to lives in the U.S. with critical resources and support while also sharing their culture with the L.A. community. Aidan Reilly brought together a nationwide network of young volunteers tackle food waste and insecurity they're rescuing tons of excess produce from farms to feed the hungry. From Chicago, Deborah Vines struggled to find support and resources when her son Jason was diagnosed with autism. Now, she's providing services and education to African American families and first responders. And Atlanta's Bobby Wilson is feeding and healing his urban community by teaching thousands of people how to plant grow and prepare their own healthy food. (END VIDEOTAPE) (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP) WIRE:  Ten-second trivia: American, Bridal Veil, and Horseshoe are features that combine to make what natural wonder? Great Barrier Reef, Niagara Falls, Grand Canyon, or Galapagos Islands. Located on the U.S. Canadian border, these are the names of the three waterfalls that together make Niagara Falls. (END VIDEO CLIP) WEIR:  We're giving this next story an A-plus, a gold star, and a 10 out of 10. Niagara Falls, one of the natural wonders of the world, on the New York and Canadian border, draws visitors from every corner of the planet who come to see its majestic cascading water. Well, there's a tunnel buried deep beneath the falls. It's been off limits until now. It's about seven football fields long it was built more than a century ago on the Canadian side as part of the former Niagara Parks Power Station. And visitors can now venture through the plant down the corridor and onto a waterside platform for some of the most breathtaking views in the world. This has been an awesome week. Happy Friday, everyone. Keep in touch over the weekend. I'm @CoyWire on Insta, Snapchat and TikTok. We're CNN 10 on YouTube. We want to give a special shout out now to Vista Middle School in Ferndale, Washington. Remember, you are more powerful than you know. I'm Coy. This is CNN 10. It's been a blessing to spend this week with you. END